Hi. My name is Chris Emura.
I'm the Filesystem Engineering Manager
with an Apple's Core OS organization.
And today we'll be talking a little about
Mac OS X filesystems and related technologies.
This is obviously targeted to both halves as
far as the developers and the IT professionals.
But there's really a little something in
here for everyone that's just an end user.
Our agenda is pretty compact.
We'll be doing a very quick overview.
( Applause )
I'll talk about some things that are specific
to our platform as far as, you know, Mac OS X-isms.
What's changed since Tiger.
What's new in Leopard.
A few words on the ZFS developer preview.
And then some time at the very end may
be 10, 15 minutes for Q&A. All right.
Let's get started.
So quick overview.
In all the years we've done this session it kind of occurred
to me that we've never had a master slide that just kind
of dumped out all the filesystems on our platform.
And so, put something together really quickly.
Divided into 3 basic buckets, the local filesystems,
the network file sharing protocols,
both client and server, and then some third party mentions.
XSAN is not really a local file
systems I had nowhere else to put it.
There's going to be a number of sessions during
this week that talk about XSAN in much more details.
So if you are interested in that technology, you
know, by all means please attend those sessions.
On the local filesystem front, as most of you know, our
primary filesystem is going to be Journaled HFS+.
We also have FAT 32, FAT 16, all the variance for a lot
of the consumer-level devices whether they be your
camera, your flash cards, things of that nature.
UDF, the Universal Disk Format, has undergone
some significant changes in Leopard.
We have a dedicated slide for that.
It's typically associated though with optical media.
NTFS, some kind of under the radar, but it's
actually been completely rewritten in Leopard.
Read-only support still at this point but watch this space.
There's going to be some things happening in that area.
ISO9660 and CDDAFS kind of round things off in optical media.
On the file sharing side again, both client and server.
We've got the Windows file sharing as far as SMB and CIFS.
Those of you familiar on the UNIX
side, of course, NFS V2 and V3.
And then for us on the internal side, the Apple
File Sharing Protocol which you'll probably see
as a default for Mac-to-Mac communication.
Third party, there's obviously many more third-party
products as far as filesystems and file sharing protocols.
I just mentioned AFS and Amit Singh's MacFUSE because
it's just getting some great press recently.
Good examples of technology on our platform.
With all those filesystems you've got various capabilities.
And some of them are pretty mundane as far as limits,
maximum file size, maximum filesystem size and so on.
These are things you guys can look up on your own.
We won't talk about them in any great detail here.
When it comes to filesystem-specific fcntl()s or capabilities,
things are pretty much documented in the fcntl() man page.
These are things, of course, you should feel free to use,
but at the same time as developers, you know, the more --
the deeper your dependencies are on these
type of specific capabilities, in general,
the less portable your code's going to be.
So just take care in those situations.
Crash protection is not something you're
going to code against necessarily.
But just as an end user something to be aware of.
In terms of our local filesystems,
the only local filesystem
with formal crash protection is going
to be Journaled HFS, of course.
That said on the FAT side of things
we've gone through great lengths
to balance crash protection as
far as robustness and performance.
And so with our FAT implementation I think you'll see
we've headed quite nicely in terms of finding that mix
or that balance between being able to survive
plug pulls and so on versus just raw performance.
Going on with the various capabilities I wanted
to call this one out specifically this year.
Sparse file support, we don't have native sparse
file support on our primary filesystem HFS.
So you will pay that zero fill "cost".
If that's going to be a problem
for any of you as developers,
come talk to us either after this
session or during the lab tomorrow.
There are definitely a number of tricks
or workarounds we've used in the past
that have made other vendors happy with this limitation.
Case sensitivity.
This one almost never gets talked
about, at least in any kind of detail.
For starters we offer case sensitive HFS as
a first-class filesystem on our platform.
Something we tend to steer people towards as
far as those looking for case sensitivity.
But as developers a lot of time we do C-code.
It's internal too. We make the same mistakes as far as people
hard coding case incorrectness into their actual, their code.
They have to hard code info.plist, when,
in fact, it's a capital I, for example.
So they get away with it on their primary filesystem
a lot of times when there's case insensitivity.
But in the case sensitive side these type of
look ups, these types of operations will fail.
So the general message here is, as developers, please,
test your code on a case-sensitive format as well.
Another subtle point involves people that come
from other platforms often times with tarballs
for their home directories, whatever it may be.
And they come from let's say UFS
or something along those lines.
They are basically going from a case-
sensitive format to a case-insensitive one.
And with something like tar, it's very easy to kind
of lose some data here in terms of having two files
that basically collide that only differ in case.
And on the case-insensitive filesystem
you'll overwrite one.
And that can be silent for a while and won't
notice until you start poking around.
So just something to be mindful of.
Access control lists.
This is very prominent now on our platform.
Whenever I talk about access control lists
or ACLs I like to start off by comparing it
with the old-school UNIX user ID and mode_t bits.
I think everyone in this room is probably pretty
familiar with this as far as the read-write execute bits
for yourself, groups you belong to,
and pretty much the rest of the world.
There's other limitations, of course,
with regards to 16 groups and no nesting.
But, you know, this has served most of us pretty well
as far as being a very simple, easy-to-understand model.
That said, there's a lot of times when you do
want to express yourself in terms of permissions,
a little bit finer granularity,
and with that, again, the access control lists.
I've highlighted a couple here I feel that are pretty much
difficult or impossible to express the traditional mode_t.
As far as appending to a file or changing
the security information of a file.
And you'll note for everyone of these entries here
there's an allow or deny flag.
So the list itself is actually pretty long.
You can kind of see how much finer granularity you have,
how much expressive power you have with regard
to permissions with access control lists.
Extended Attributes.
I should kind of start of describing what they are.
As most you know, extended attributes are
simply arbitrary bits of data that don't live
in a natural file itself--they don't
live in the data fork, if you will.
They can be quite useful in situations
where you are working with the file format.
That's got no allowance for tucking away a little bit
of extended metadata, you can just
go ahead and use the EAs there.
On our files, or on our platform, they are
going to be supported in all filesystems.
I think at first that sounds a bit
odd but I'll explain a little further.
Obviously for cases where the filesystem supports
EAs natively, we will use the native method.
That's pretty straight forward.
In situations where the filesystem does not support EAs
natively, we will synthesize support at the VFS level
and store the actual EAs in what's
called an Apple Double File.
I'll talk about that a little bit more later.
The convention we use for the actual
EA tags is pretty simple.
We just use the reverse-DNS name
convention, the FinderInfo is listed here.
We don't actually enforce this,
but it's something that, you know,
we encourage you using that keeps
things nice and clean, very manageable.
And there's a good past precedent for this as well.
Also want to call out current limitations.
The main one I'm talking about today is size.
The current lowest common denominator of size
per EA is roughly just under 4K, about 3803.
I can't remember the exact number but it's around there.
This is really something we should put
in some kind of volume capability bit
and advertise a little bit more strongly.
But at this point just be aware that the current
lowest common denominator is in this neighborhood.
I call out current and I don't know if
any of your browsed the open source code.
We do have some work in place for extent-
based EAs that hasn't been turned on just yet.
But just so you know this is something, you know,
that could be lifted at some point in the future.
Preservation when it comes to extended
metadata or EAs in general.
Definitely something you want to be mindful of even if you
don't use EAs directly, it's very, very easy for you guys
to strip off -- just as end users, just to strip off EAs.
Doing very basic operations, operations with
utilities or applications that may not be EA aware.
And so, you know, again something for you to be mindful of.
I'll talk about some alternate methods to do copies.
We don't have to worry about this.
But if for some reason you have
to roll your own copy engine,
your own copy functionality do moves or some kind of archive.
When it comes to preservation we have an
internal monitor that focuses on three things.
Always the same three things.
It's the data, of course, I mean the data itself, the extended
attributes, including the resource fork which shows
up in the EA name space, and then
the security information itself.
Each one of these buckets or these categories
has its own corresponding API
or family of APIs to manipulate this data.
So if you have to roll your own, those are
the three things you need to focus on.
This is a slide we actually use every year.
It's a good one.
It kind of gives you the lay of the land of
the various frameworks and how they fit in.
Those of you coming from other flavors of UNIX you'll be
very familiar with the BSD or the POSIX-level API.
You know, it's again, it's pretty much the same thing.
The problem or the limitation with the BSD API, is that
they don't show the limitations at the various filesystems,
they don't distinguish much between the two as far
as -- and everything will be exposed at that level.
So as a general rule,
we ask people to kind of move up in terms of using the
Carbon file manager or the Core Services file manager
and the NSFileManager to kind of protect you from
the differences between the various filesystems.
Just a general suggestion as far as not
having to worry about my new show or any kind
of specific details behind each different
filesystem and its capabilities.
Okay. Let's switch gears a little bit and
talk about things that are more or less unique
to our platform, especially useful to those of you
who are new to our platform and kind of familiar
with the LINUX side, or the Solaris side or
whatever it may be.
First one is those Apple Double Files.
This always gets an incredible amount of attention.
There's all kind of different terms for this.
As I mentioned earlier they are use to back these extended
attributes in cases where native support isn't available.
So you would think in the future as, you know, you
look at future filesystems and future protocols
in general most of those come with native supports.
So the idea hopefully is that in the future these
Apple Double Files will become more and more rare.
There's legacy usage withstanding, of course.
The convention is pretty simple for any given file
foo you have a corresponding ._ file
which again backs all of those EAs and so on.
When you use the upper level APIs as I mentioned
earlier, it tends to abstract away things.
These ._ files, these Apple Double Files
will not show up in that particular --
they won't show up at all in the native space.
And so you won't be aware of them.
For better or for worse, my opinion, these things should be
actually taken out completely as far as the name space.
But at the BSD level, these things are exposed not just at
the API level but also command line, things like find or LS.
You will see these ._ files.
So please resist the temptation to
operate on these things directly.
You should never have to do that.
The kernel manages these things completely as
far as creation, renames, and unlinks, or deletes.
And so there really isn't any need
for you to manipulate these ._
files, these Apple Double Files directly.
getattrlist(). What can I say?
For those of you coming from the UNIX side
it sure don't smell like a UNIX function.
But it is a full fledged VNOP.
It's a fancy way of saying it's here to stay,
it's a first-class function on our platform.
The best way to describe it for those of you on the
UNIX side is this is pretty much a superset of stat().
You get attributes of a file,
everything that stat provides and much more.
Those of you from the Carbon side of the house, this is
pretty much how FSGetCatalogInfo() is implemented.
So if you are familiar with that call,
you'll be familiar with this mechanism.
It does have, in my opinion at least, one kind of
really nice quality as far as this selection bitmap.
And I think the best way to describe that is to
compare it to something like stat which operates
with this fixed struct stat buffer, if you will.
With stat, as you know, you get everything whether or not
you need it or not, you are going to get everything,
you're going to have to pay for everything.
With the selection bitmap and getattrlist() you can only specify
the attributes you want and only pay for the ones you want.
So right off the bat there is a nice
semantic there with regard to costs.
Especially in the future if you see some of these
attributes costing much more than others in a lot of cases
where you don't really need them or don't care.
The other nice property with this selection
bitmap and getattrlist() is extensibility.
I think it's pretty obvious in terms of a well-
define structure like stat in general and you have
to add new fields or may be blow out the width of a field,
the inode 64-bit from 32-bit is a classic example.
With getattrlist() you at least have the option with the
selection bitmap to define a new field or nview type
and not have to worry as much about
extensibility and backwards compatibility.
MNT_IGNORE_OWNERSHIP.
This is a much higher level model or construct here.
I'll start with this motivation.
Motivation is actually pretty simple.
I think a lot of you guys in this
room can't or don't relate as much
because you can figure out other ways to get around it.
But motivation is such that you have two computers
or two users, both with completely different UIDs,
different UID spaces, if you will, of directly services.
They are not bound to the same directory service.
This is completely different.
And you want to move or share files from one to
the other with say an external FireWire drive.
So we have Joe here, user ID 501, Sam
on another machine, UID 502.
All those files there are kind of laid out with Joe's
UID, brings it over to Sam's computer, and again for a lot
of less technical users, on the read-
only side you are typically okay
but, you know, even then there can be some problems
just because Sam owns none of those files, you know,
with the traditional kind of UNIX
model, if you will, for permissions.
This can be a little bit overwhelming
for a less technical user like Sam.
So by default we go ahead and mount
all those external drives
with this nondurable state, this
MNT_IGNORE_OWNERSHIP flag.
It's intended to be transparent.
But the bottom line here is it's pretty
self explanatory in terms of all these processes
on Sam's machine, any nonroot process
will see their own UID when looking
at the directory ownership or file ownership of those files.
So even though Joe's UID is what's on disk, whenever Sam
does an LS or takes a look at those files, he will see,
you know, those files as being owned by him.
And so clearly on the read-only side you are
really good, I mean there's no problems at all.
It's as if he owns those files.
On the write side so long as you are in this mode,
so long as you are mounting in this mode regardless
of what your UID is, anything you
write out to disk will be UID 99.
So you don't -- better way to phrase
this -- but you won't pollute, you know,
the name space when you bring it back into Joe's computer.
UID 99 is kind of a wild card here.
Any time we see it on disk it will be
interpreted as the calling process UID.
So that's how these things kind of work out if you will.
It's not a perfect solution.
And for those of you thinking about security
implications about how I can possibly tell the difference
between UID 99 versus the real UID so to speak.
Root processes will always see the truth and that's
kind of how we mitigate any exposure in that area.
Just log in as root and take a look.
You should see the truth there.
The Finder's Get Info panel, by the way, also kind
of lets you know what state you are in.
If you look at the Ignore ownership on this volume check
box in the Sharing pane, this corresponds directly
to whether or not that flag is set or clear.
volfs. Okay.
It's got a pretty clear message.
We have to give this message every year but I
wanted to go a little bit more into what it actually is.
I'll explain what it is and I am not going to debate
the merits of look up by path vs. look up by tuple
or look up by some kind of inode number.
You know the message is the same year after year,
please do not depend on volfs directly.
Please do not depend on volfs directly.
Let's kind of go into what it is.
It's pretty simple. volfs is a filesystem
that implements an alternate look up method.
I mean you guys are all familiar with regular
paths whether they be absolute or relative.
I've got an example here where I just cat foo.text.
Very simple look up method if you will.
volfs simply implements this alternate look up
method where you can pass in a unique tuple.
In this case some kind of FS ID and then some file ID,
or an inode number. It's an alternate method
to get to that particular file.
That's all it is, as far as mechanism
was implemented as a filesystem.
We just ask that you do not use this directly, that's all.
Okay. Let's change gears again really quickly.
What's changed or what's new in Leopard?
Start off with a copy engine.
FSCopyObject. As far as this API,
it's easily been one of the most requested
features, very robust in terms of being able
to preflight high performance, cross volume
format so you don't have to be aware
of what filesystem you are copying from and to.
And it is the same engine that the Finder uses.
So you know it's quite robust.
It's got quite a bit of soak time if you will
and exposure.
It's quite well tested, quite well used.
And, of course, it takes care of all of those
things about the preservation I mentioned earlier.
The data, the EAs, and the security information.
You don't have to familiarize yourself with
the APIs that are required to copy the EAs
and security information. This will do it for you.
So it's something we recommend you use.
You see the synchronous/asynchronous versions of the call below.
It's something that you can look up
on the ADC site for sample code.
We did talk about this in more detail last year.
So go ahead and refresh yourselves
by looking up that reference.
Safe saves.
The mechanism itself certainly isn't new, but
this year given some feedback from last year,
I kind of wanted to talk about what safe saves were.
I think all of you guys know what this is in general.
Terminology may be different but all safe saves are, are a
way to guarantee a very nice semantic in terms of --
you want to modify a document and you
want it to only end up in one of two states.
Either the original document is untouched
or all of your changes have made it over.
All are nothing, right.
Never a situation where the document was half modified.
Something along those lines.
And so with any safe save mechanism we start
off with the original document or file,
we go ahead and make a complete copy, and
you only work and modify on that file.
When you are all done you go ahead and close,
you sync and you check for errors. of course.
And then you go ahead and do an atomic rename, or
exchangedata, the HFS case and you get your semantic.
You'll notice that during that entire flow
there's no point where I can introduce a fault
and then be left in an inconsistent state.
Either all the changes have made
it over or none of them at all.
And that's pretty much what the safe save mechanism is.
New in Leopard we have the ReplaceObject API
that implements this as far as safe save.
And just like with the copy engine there's no need for you
to kind of be aware of what API or what calls I should use
for the preservation exchange data versus rename.
It's a port across all filesystems and it does
the right thing with regard to preservation.
You may have already seen it in use
by NSDocument as far as that class.
You'll see the temporary subdirectory there.
If you need more information just like last year
this is talked about in a little more detail,
look at the AppKit Release Notes or go ahead and grap
around for the API there on the ADC website. Take a look
at that and download that, play with it a bit.
Oh, there's that VolFS again.
So this year in Leopard no more volfs--period.
As far as the filesystem itself
has been completely removed.
Of course, none of you were depending on it in
the first place, so this should not be a problem.
But seriously speaking you won't
see them in the filesystem listing.
There was a pragmatic side as well
for those of you tools like FS usage.
I know I get a lot of hate mail about how
annoying it is to look at volfs paths all day.
You'll finally see full blown paths in traces like this
which is a little bit more readable,
a little bit more helpful.
So there's a pragmatic side as well.
So no more volfs at least the filesystem.
Deprecation of UFS is a phased deprecation.
Starting with Leopard you won't be able to
install on a UFS root and you won't be able
to create a UFS filesystem at least not from the GUI.
Eventually the end game here is to get to a
point where we only support read-only UFS.
Most of the people, seriously, you
know, this is nothing personal.
Most people that basically use UFS are
really after the case sensitivity, at least
in my experience wherever I ask this question.
So again for case sensitivity if that's what you are
after right now, please go ahead and
switch over to case-sensitive HFS.
UDF. Universal disk format from
OSTA that's an open filesystem.
Like I said earlier this is completely rewritten in Leopard.
And we've got read/write support.
Burning is always going to be
there as far as the optical side.
I think the nice change now with UDF
is that we fully support block storage devices,
block addressable devices, whether they be your flash thumb
drive, CF/SD card, or even just a portable USB drive.
You'll see that Vista's got corresponding support as well.
Kind of moving in that direction as much.
It's not going to be a replacement
for FAT overnight that's for sure.
I mean FATs pretty much the de facto
standard for this kind of operability.
But the device vendors are very much aware of this as
far as the consumer guys and other vendors, you know,
UNIX and ourselves and Microsoft are
kind of bumping up their support of UDF.
So something to be aware of, something
to, in my opinion, be excited about.
It doesn't have the same limitations as
far as metadata and sizes that FAT does.
So it's, you know, there's some potential here.
Enhancements to ls.
The hang around on the command line or the
shell--you always, I think, are already familiar
with the -E option for ACL or the access control lists.
You'll see that little + sign next
to the mode_t bit which lets you know
that this file has at least one access control entry.
When you use the -L option in
conjunction, you get the full listing.
Similarly with extended attributes if I only have a main
stream command at least in the command line, right,
to give you the same type of information for EAs,
you have a little @ sign here next to
the mode_t bits which lets you know there's
at least one extended attribute for this file.
And when used the conjunction with the
-L option you go ahead and see everything
as far as the tags and the size and bytes.
And you can see that the tags conform to that
reverse-DNS convention I mentioned earlier.
Access control lists, you know, certainly not new in Leopard
but what's changing here is that
they are on by default for one.
Got no choice at this point.
They are on by default and they are
actually used in a very mainstream way.
If you look at this listing here this is
basically your default home directory.
And you'll see there are a bunch of access
control entries for the well-known folders.
The everyone deny delete I believe, yes.
This is basically the "do not shoot
yourself in the foot" access control entry.
Of course, you can go ahead and remove that explicitly
and go ahead and remove the directory if you need to.
But it's a nice level of protection,
a little safety net there.
That's the ls listing from the shell.
The Finders Get Info panel's been modified and updated
to kind of give you the same information in terms
of viewing the access control lists and also modifying them.
So something to check out and start seeing a lot
more usage here in terms of access control lists.
You'll be able do the same thing with your applications in
terms of sharing or providing these kind of safety nets here.
FSEvents.
This is our filesystem event notification
or change notification framework.
It's a nice, it's a really nice
framework in terms of being very simple.
It's the same thing -- not the same thing.
It's what underlies Spotlight so it's quite powerful,
yet it's all user land unlike kauth
which is also quite powerful but
much more difficult to program too.
So simple user land file change notification mechanism.
We actually talked about a little bit last year.
Kind of at the same session.
This year we have a dedicated session for
this that goes over this in much more detail.
Provides that same watcher sample code.
It's a good one to go to tomorrow at 3:30.
A lot of times I get questions about
how is this different than kqueues?
For starters it's certainly much more
sophisticated than kqueues while being able to use
but with kqueues the most succinct example I can give is if
you are just going to monitor one file or just a few files
or may be a directory, and just its immediate
children, kqueue is usually pretty nice in that context.
Kind of what it's designed for.
But if you want to monitor an entire directory
hierarchy all the way down to the leaves,
changes anywhere in that hierarchy
kqueue is not going to be adequate
and you should really be using something like FSEvents.
So if you want to learn more about that in much
more detail, please attend that session tomorrow.
Filesystem corruption detection
infrastructure or framework.
This is something that we've introduced
specifically in Leopard or new in Leopard.
It's very dynamic.
There's nothing you have to do
explicitly in terms of offline your disk,
or unmount your disk, downgrade
mount your disk to read only.
Nothing like that.
It's all dynamic.
It happens in the runtime.
At very little there's little performance
penalty here at all, it's always running.
It's basically triggered by physical disk problems,
any kind of physical disk I/O errors or a number
of data integrity checks that we're doing in the runtime.
And so it's always running and kind
of keeping track of things there.
In the event that you do have a problem
and NS fsck is going to be triggered,
is reboot and hopefully everything will be
fixed, hopefully it's not a physical problem.
Hopefully everything will be fixed and you
will be along your way.
In the cases where we cannot fix the
drive, it will not be mounted as read only.
Not going to look the other way and let
you read/write and do whatever you want.
It's one of those things where we want -- and the motivation
here in read-only mounts is not to do anymore damage.
Kind of let you know something is wrong.
You can still salvage things from a read-
only context as far as copying things over,
but don't want to mounted read/write certainly not
by default just in case something is seriously wrong
and you are going to make the situation worse.
Where possible.
We are going to try to provide specific
paths or file names so kind of get a feel
for what's been damaged or what's been impacted.
Kind of as a side note it's not
really directly tied to this project.
But we also had improved fsck in terms of
providing a -c or cache size option.
Kind of realize that these days there are a lot of
you out there with huge, huge memory configurations.
And we are not taking advantage of that by default in fsck.
So we provide this explicit option for those of you who hang
out in the command line, you can start
passing much larger values for the block cache
and make your performance actually jump quite a bit.
So check that out.
That's actually documented in the man page for fsck.
It should be documented anyway.
Okay. How do we get started here?
HFS Directory Hard Links.
HFS Directory Hard Link is specifically
created for Time Machine.
It's specific to Journaled HFS+.
As you know with Time Machine or most backup infrastructures
you've got some kind of level zero where you back everything
up and then incrementals from that
point on that keep track of the changes.
For the incrementals you want to complete a
view of the tree but not have to incur the costs
of copying things that haven't been changed.
So it's pretty obvious how the hard links fit in.
You basically create a hard link, in this case for
subdirectory 1 where things haven't changed
and you kind of get the same view, if you will.
There's a reason why hard links
aren't very popular in the industry.
Actually there's a number of reasons.
This is probably one of the biggest
ones as far as either maliciously
or accidentally creating a cycle in the name space.
A lot of bad things happen because
it's very difficult to detect this.
At least in a timely manner.
And so you know a cycle is kind of represented by this red
line where it created a hard link from one of the trees
in level zero up to the root of incremental 1.
If I were to transcend to one of these
directories you'd loop for a long time, if not forever.
Bad things happen.
So we put very conservative limits on link creations to
prevent these cycles from occurring in the first place.
So with that all that said, kind of get the feeling that
this is definitely not intended for general purpose use.
It's very specific.
Future changes may certainly occur not, just
with the on-disk format, but also with the SPI,
as far as how we do these in the first place.
With that said I'm sure all of you are
going to start poking around in the backing
store anyway. Just be aware we've had some problems
here already with regard to this very basic scenario.
Again the level zero in the incremental from the name
space point of view this is basically what you see.
It looks like they are completely isolated.
And you guys know better now, but it looks like from
the utility's point of view ones that aren't aware
of directory hard links this is what they see.
In the level zero hierarchy that's
completely separate from an incremental.
And it seems natural that if you want to blow away the
incremental version, you should just be able to point
at the root there and it will do the right thing.
Of course, because it's implemented this way
as soon as you're naive RM command goes in there,
depth first goes to subdirectory one, you will actually
be on the level zero side, start unrolling there
and start deleting things from the originals.
So this view isn't what it seems, so to speak.
You've got this implementation.
So a lot of utilities are not going to be aware.
Just be careful, this is just one of
many I'm sure as far as gotchas.
( Pause )
Okay. Let's completely switch gears.
Talk a little bit about the ZFS on Mac
OS X Server, the Developer Preview.
Let's start really quickly describing what it is.
I think a lot of you guys already know
what it is but kind of bear with me here.
ZFS is the next-generation filesystem from
Sun Microsystems that's been ported to our platform.
In my opinion it has no equal in terms of the data
integrity side of things for any production filesystem.
And by data integrity I just don't mean the cases where
you have a huge number of disks and a lot of resources even
down if you look at this kind of slider, all they way
down the single spindle cases ZSF can really do a good job
in those cases as well when it comes to data integrity.
It uses a pooled storage model
which is a great departure away
of from traditional LVM, logical
volume managers and partitions.
Talk a little bit more about that.
It introduces RAID-Z, a great improvement
over something like or RAID 5
and if we have time, I'll dig into that a little bit.
Something that I like a lot about it is
kind of built in live disk scrubbing.
It's well beyond anything like an fsck as
far as checking everything, all the blocks,
metadata and data.
And most importantly it can do this live on a system;
you don't have to again downgrade, mount or unmount,
or boot in to some other OS to go
ahead and do this, so it can do it live.
And it's really got first-class snapshots and clones.
Where clones are read only or read/write snapshots.
First class, I mean not just in terms
of functionality, in terms of no limits,
but also implementation.
It's not a bolt on architecture as far as snapshots
being very fundamental to designers of ZFS
And of all the other kind of features,
if you will, it's going to end it here
with compression capability, built-in compression capability.
And this is great not just for
disk savings, which is important,
but also for generating much higher I/O throughput
for workloads that compress very well.
Just because of the amount of work you have
to do from disk is diminished quite a bit.
When it expands out you can synthetize
these huge I/O rates and so.
This is just a little bit, this is a
scratch in the service with regard to ZFS.
There's much more out there that you guys
can read up about.
I'm only going to talk about two things actually today.
Talk a little bit more about the data integrity
model, and then the pooled storage model.
Let's go ahead and start with the
data integrity side of things.
With ZFS everything is copy on write.
So you never overwrite live data.
This is a great property you have
from an integrity point of view.
It's very similar, in fact, to the whole safe save mechanism,
instead of for documents think of it as a safe save
for blocks, if you will, with some
kind of transactional switch.
In this case we'd over simplify and represent
a ZFS filesystem as a tree of blocks.
Kind of represented by a uberblock
or head pointer of sorts.
And you want to make a modification.
You go ahead and copy and write, you know, your changes.
Then I can copy and write the indirect nodes of the tree,
indirect blocks, and when you are all done we can go ahead
and atomically update the uberblock.
Update that version there and you'll notice just
like with the safe save there is no point in time
where you can eject the fault, would
it be a power outage, plug pull, panic,
whatever it is there's no point you can introduce
a fault and be left in an inconsistent state.
This is very simple but it's also
very powerful and very provable.
It's a very nice departure from traditional,
you know, overwriting things live and hoping
for things to work out with some kind of replay.
Another aspect of ZFS data integrity involves checksums.
Checksums, I think, are a very natural extension
of any kind of data integrity goal.
But I wanted to start off with conventional checksums
as far as checks sums that are local or very close
to data, block global checksums, for example.
They are certainly better than nothing as far as, at least
you're doing something to help ensure data integrity.
It will catch bit rot, for example.
But anytime you have block local checksums
you are vulnerable to a number of problems.
These are problems that are common enough such that
they have industry standard terms or terminology.
I'm going to talk about phantom writes and misdirection
that's because I've seen those myself personally.
I can vouch for them, if you will.
Phantom writes are simply a case where you do a
write, the driver, the device acknowledges the write
and it just basically drops it, kind of disappears.
Checksums, at least local checksums, are
not going to help you on that situation.
Misdirection is just a fancy term for, let's say, you use a
filesystem asking the driver to drive itself or block 17.
The driver returns blocks 71.
The checksums check out and I keep on going.
So we are not going to help you in that situation either.
So again, better than nothing but
there are some vulnerabilities here.
So compare that to how ZFS uses
checksums, kind of this indirect model.
For starters everything in ZFS, at least
by default, everything is checksummed,
not just the metadata but the data as well.
There's this kind of fault isolation or indirection
between the actual data and the checksums.
So in this kind of simple layout here
this tree of blocks, if you will,
anytime I modify the data and go ahead
and calculate the checksum store
that in the address away from it
as far as an apparent porter,
calculate the checksum for those kind of transitively
kind of roll up here all the way to the uberblock.
Get a nice end to end, you know, this is a very
secure way to do things as far as data integrity goes.
For those of you who want a more formal definition
you can go ahead and look up Merkle tree or Hash Trees,
it's got some nice properties that are exploited.
But all those previous problems I mentioned earlier
as far as the misdirection, the phantom writes,
and everything, those are all covered at least they'll
be detected by this particular checksum scheme.
So quite an improvement over block local checksums.
And finally, there's actually a bit more but this is the
last leg I'm going to talk about regarding data integrity.
Let's call it variable redundancy.
If you are looking at any kind of block
tree layout again over simplified here.
There's the triangle or the tree itself.
You'll have to agree that it's a lot
worse to lose blocks further up the tree.
Meaning, it's bad to lose blocks, in general to have
something bad happen to a block, but if something bad has
to happen, you want it to be at the leaf level.
Where that's all you'll lose.
You've just lost the leaf.
If you lose an interior node you start
to lose many more -- much more data, and
this kind of logically includes the uberblock where
that's probably the most catastrophic block to lose.
So with ZFS, the more important metadata, the further
up the tree you go, the more highly replicated you are.
So it's a nice semantic or nice design
principle to have with regard to data integrity.
Okay. Let's talk about the pool model, at least a
little bit as far as how it impacts you as users.
All of you are familiar with this basic
configuration as far as a drive and a filesystem.
That's what we all have basically or most of us have.
It works out pretty well, it's worked out for a long time.
The problem is you fill this drive up.
I'm going to have to buy more storage.
And for a lot of you the first step, which probably
be just to create another filesystem, it's fine.
Something you're going to have to manage though
as far as maybe new files go on the new filesystem,
old files you have to remember that are
on the old filesystem.
A little bit of management overhead
here, a little bit more clumsy,
but it's not the end of the world.
It's certainly something that's served
all of us fairly well for a long time.
A lot of you can bring up a logical
volume manager, at least a traditional one
where I concatenate the two drives
together, and that's fine.
That's actually a lot better in terms of
management in the previous situation.
Of course, if I started out with the previous
situation I'd have to back everything up,
create my volume and then restore everything on there.
You know, again, not the end of the world.
This is certainly a better model but it's still pretty
rigid as far as the association between my filesystem,
the volume, and my initial choice to create this
particular -- this particular concatenated volume in this case.
In summary, there's always going to be
this association between a partition
or a volume, some kind of dev node in every filesystem.
Sure you can grow and shrink.
I shrink, most of the time any way, by hand or explicitly.
So there's -- there's ways you can get around this as
far as growing into new storage as it becomes available.
I think the main point here is that you have
these kind of stranded storage islands, as far
as with this layout here, anything in
filesystem 3 that's excess or extra,
whether it be extra bandwidth or extra space
cannot be utilized by filesystems 1 and 2.
Once you've made up your mind it becomes
a little bit more manual or impossible
in some cases to kind of rebalance things around.
You have to do a very manual process.
Things are very rigid.
There's a very rigid association between the layers here.
And so things are so much grounded
once you make up your mind.
Looking at the ZFS pool model we start off with
filesystems are built on top of storage pools.
And just like with LVMs, pools do
abstract away the physical storage.
That's what they have in common.
But unlike traditional logical
volume managers, all available space
and bandwidth in the pool is actually
shared by all the filesystems on top of it.
And here's what's kind of interesting.
The filesystems themselves are very lightweight in terms
of being able to create and destroy as many as you want.
They are very similar semantically to folders
and directories.
Not quite the same but they are very similar
especially from an end-user point of view.
You guys don't give any second thought
to creating folders or directories.
You don't have to worry about how much space is available in
general or associating it with a partition or a filesystem
or anything along those lines. You
just go ahead and create them.
Same thing with the filesystems here.
Pools themselves can be configured
by mirroring, concatenation,
or this RAIDZ configuration or a combination of the three.
And to kind of explain this a little bit better I'll
go ahead and talk about that same scenario earlier.
We have a single drive.
We create a ZFS pool or a Z pool there
and put a filesystem on top of it.
That kind of looks just like the logical volume scenario.
But with the pool model you can create as many
filesystems as you want, as many or as few.
Very dynamic, you are not stuck with your initial decision.
Go ahead and create as many as you want.
They all share the bandwidth and the space of that drive.
In this case I kind of gave them folder-
like names as far as Movies and so on.
Very dynamic model here.
When you run out of space, go ahead and add a new
drive, the pool expands, you don't have to do anything
with regard to all those files in those filesystems or
those folders, the Movies, Pictures, Documents and so on.
You don't have to do anything.
There's no explicit action you have to take.
They all immediately see all that extra space,
can take advantage of that extra bandwidth there.
So again a very dynamic model.
Growing and shrinking is automatic.
There is no explicit anything here and
like I keep on reiterating all the space
of all the underlying storage devices
is all shared space and bandwidth.
For those of you who are thinking, you
know, it's nice in a multi-spindle type
of configurations, these dynamic pool properties do
apply to single spindle configurations as well.
I know a lot of you as developers may have some
big drives for your desktop or your laptops.
And, you know, you may have a couple
boot partitions, a big data partition.
And once you kind of set on that or you make that
configuration choice, you are somewhat stuck.
Meaning if you kind of misjudged, miscalculated,
you want to move things around you can do it.
Actually most of you in this room could probably
do it mechanically but it can be a bit of pain.
With ZFS just have a pool on top of there,
create as many filesystems as you want.
You don't have to worry about preallocating
or precalculating size
and such, things work out very nicely there.
How we doing on time here?
We have a lot of time.
So RAIDZ. I want to talk about this.
There's also a mirror configuration but it's a little bit,
it's actually pretty interesting, I don't have any slides
for that at this point in time.
RAIDZ is something that's specific to ZFS.
And the best way I like to introduce
it as an improvement over RAID-5.
And I think most of you are familiar with
traditional RAID-5. It's an N plus 1 model.
It's pretty simple, it works well today.
Basic idea, of course, is to kind of stripe your data across
one parity disk and distributing your parity out there,
but kind of the key here is that value
of N is always going to be fixed.
It's what drives the detection in the first place.
Let's just say we're going to use some exclusive war
function for our detection or function itself.
The end value, that fixed value, is what drives
the error detection and also the reconstruction.
And in this example and further examples
I'm going use a fixed value of 3.
3 data block or 3 data disk and 1 parity disk.
Problem is with any RAID-5 configuration any value
of N, you are always going to have a situation
where you have a write, an outstanding write, that
does not fill the full width of that stripe.
That's always going to be the case.
There's never a situation where you
can always have complete stripe writes.
And so in this case kind of represent that N
plus or 3 plus 1, 3 data blocks, 1 parity block,
let's just say my workload right now is
just 1 data block.
I go ahead and write that data out,and at that exact
moment in time you notice the parity is no longer valid.
If I were to crash at this point in time,
you'd be in a little bit of trouble just
because things are just out of
sync at this point.
Of course, if nothing happens, you go ahead and
update the new parity and things kind of work out.
But, like I said earlier, because you cannot atomically
update all those disks at that same time, if a fault occurs
after the data is updated, the new data, but
before the parity update, you'll have corruption.
And this is known in the industry as RAID-5 write hole.
The side effect of the fact that you are updating
data in place.
There are certainly workarounds for
this as far as on the enterprise side.
Battery backed NVRAM and so on.
Typically associated again with
the enterprise space, however.
So on to RAIDZ and how RAIDZ gets around this problem or
solves this problem, if you will, is variable stripe width.
And that's something that's very
well captured by this diagram.
The colors basically represent the stripe
width, and you can see that they're variable.
You have some very wide stripes, some
very small ones, and things in between.
Point being is that you always, because you're
variable, everything becomes a full stripe write.
So right off the bat there's not going to be any read-
modify-write in terms of the performance side of things.
When you copy that with copy on write, like I
said earlier where you never overwrite live data,
the RAID-5 write hole is eliminated completely.
And so you solve the problem without any need
for NVRAM, special hardware, or special expenses.
The ZFS guys have a saying about ZFS loving cheap disks.
Here's our current status as far as --
as far as ZFS on Mac OS X Server.
In Leopard, I guess 10.5.0, the initial version of Leopard,
somebody already discovered this--
there's a read-only default.
Not very interesting, not much you can do.
It's the read-only version of this as far as the kext.
Over the next few weeks or so, I'd say two weeks
on the outside, hopefully, we will be introducing a
read-write beta download for all of you as ADC members.
Somebody can download for free, check
it out, play with it, kick it around.
At this point it's going to be mostly command line.
You don't have any need to integrate it with any
of the higher level GUI apps and so on.
We have not worked on performance at all at this point.
So something that we have to get going
as far as spending some time there.
And snapshots.
Snapshots actually do work.
We just haven't ported something called GFS or it's
equivalent, some type of equivalent functionality.
So you won't be able to browse them as easily
as far as mounting them on /ZFS or .ZFS.
So you can take snapshots but browsing one until we get
that component in place is not going to be as easy.
That's basically where we're at.
For more information there's a ZFS mailing list
you can kind of send feedback comments to.
There's also ZFS radar component for those
of you who have radar access and want to file bugs.
For any questions in general, ZFS, filesystem in general,
please talk to our technology evangelist Deric Horn.
His e-mail address is up there.
And you can interact with us tomorrow
at the Filesystem Lab, hopefully 10:30
in the morning is not too early for most of you.
We'll be there for, I think, an hour and a half.
And then there's that Bash on Thursday
where most of us will be attending.
You can interact with us there as
well or even after this session here.